Welcome to this video on Clustering, Dimension Reduction, and Feature Engineering.
After watching this video, you will be able to explain clustering, dimension reduction,
and feature engineering and how these techniques work together to enhance model performance.
You will also learn about dimension reduction and its role in simplifying data structures
and improving outcomes.
Additionally, you'll analyze the application of dimension reduction in face recognition
and explore how clustering can facilitate feature selection.
Clustering, dimension reduction, and feature engineering are complementary techniques in
machine learning and data science.
They work well together to improve model performance, quality, and interpretability.
Clustering helps with feature selection and creation while supporting dimension reduction
to enhance computational efficiency and scalability.
Dimension reduction simplifies the visualization of high-dimensional clustering,
aiding feature engineering and improving model quality.
It also reduces the number of features required for a data model.
Dimension reduction is commonly used as a pre-processing step for clustering,
simplifying data structure and improving outcomes.
High-dimensional data poses challenges for distance-based clustering algorithms like
k-means and DBSCAN.
As dimensionality increases, volume expands rapidly, causing data points to become sparse
and less similar.
This leads to smaller clusters requiring more data to fill gaps.
Techniques like PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP are employed to reduce dimensions
before applying clustering algorithms, enhancing efficiency.
This example uses eigenfaces as input features for supervised face recognition.
PCA is performed on an unlabeled face dataset,
extracting the top 150 eigenfaces from a total of 966 faces.
These 150 eigenfaces form an orthonormal basis for the feature space defined by the face dataset.
The input data is then projected onto this eigenface basis,
and an SMV is trained to predict faces.
Dimensionality reduction techniques preserve the key features for identifying faces while
minimizing computational load.
The facial recognition task accurately predicts 12 faces, as illustrated in this image.
This chart illustrates the quantitative evaluation of the model's quality on the dataset.
Clustering results cannot be visualized directly when working with feature spaces beyond three dimensions.
However, advanced dimension reduction techniques can project these clustering outcomes into
two or three dimensions, significantly improving visual interpretation.
Methods such as PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP allow for meaningful projections of higher-dimensional
clusters into two or three dimensions.
This enables the creation of scatter plots that facilitate the visualization of clustering quality.
Reducing the dimensionality of data often enhances cluster interoperability, making
it easier to identify key patterns or relationships that may be obscured in higher dimensions.
Clustering techniques can be applied to data observations and features.
By clustering similar or correlated features,
you can identify sets that provide redundant information.
This enables feature selection by choosing a representative feature from each cluster,
reducing the total number of features while preserving valuable information.
Clustering can help with feature engineering decisions.
For instance, if clusters indicate distinct subgroups in data, specific interactions between
features or certain transformations could benefit predictive modeling.
Here is a simple simulation using a clustering method like k-means to cluster features.
Each of the five features plotted here was generated with a random normal distribution
with three different mean values, 1, 5, and 10, and variances of 1, except for feature
number 4, which has a variance of 2.
As you can see visually, features 1 through 3 are statistically very similar, with the
same mean and variance.
Features 4 and 5 stand out.
Indeed, running k-means on the features, not the data values, with k equals 3 correctly,
clustering the features.
Cluster 1 contains redundant features, so if you were to do any modeling with this dataset,
you would want to select only one of them.
This is an example of implementing feature selection, part of feature engineering.
You can also view it as dimension reduction.
In this video, you learned to explain clustering, dimension reduction, and feature engineering
and how they work well together to improve model performance, quality, and interpretability.
Explain dimension reduction and how it is used as a preprocessing step for clustering,
simplifying data structure, and improving outcomes.
Analyze how dimension reduction is used for face recognition with eigenfaces as input features.
Analyze how clustering can be used for feature selection to identify sets that provide redundant information.
And finally, analyze feature selection using k-means to cluster features.